The Planarian Anatomy Ontology (PAO): A partonomical standard vocabulary describing planarian anatomical features from embryogenesis to adulthood

Stephanie H. Nowotarski, Sofia MC Robb, Erin L Davies, Alejandro Sánchez Alvarado

As the regenerative flatworm Schmidtea mediterranea gains popularity as a developmental model system the need for standard nomenclature and a centralized repository of anatomical terms has become increasingly apparent. Utilization of a controlled vocabulary creates opportunities to catalogue genes and expression data for computational searches across research groups and cross-species comparisons, all while establishing a framework for integration of new terms. We created a Planarian Anatomy Ontology (PAO) containing 327 terms and definitions for cellular organelles, cell types, tissues, organ systems, anatomical entities, life cycle stages and developmental processes described in the literature. Where possible, extant terms and definitions from Uberon and other open source anatomy ontologies were imported into the PAO to strengthen cross-species queries. Partonomy relationships between terms have been established; for example, cholinergic neuron is a neuron and is part of the central nervous system. Moving forward, we are employing the depicted by relationship to link image(s) of anatomical features that will be viewable using advanced search criteria on planosphere.stowers.org. The latest version of the PAO is freely available at the OBO Foundry. To support data integration and encourage contribution and curation by members of the community, we are creating the infrastructure necessary for individuals to contribute new terms, relationships and modifications for extant terms.

